[Music]
you know a lot of us have this ball and
chain when it comes to food we eat at
breakfast sweet lunch we take up so much
of our mental bandwidth that can be used
for productivity for relationships for
self-development
[Music]
water only fasting though needs to be
done resting if you're going to maximize
detox preserve lean tissue
fasting 3 days a month 7 days every 3
months 14 days once a year
my goal is to help people become their
own self-experimentation i'm a huge fan
of the ketogenic diet right i went on
the doctor osho talking about the
benefits of keto and i fell in love with
it to be honest with you
i don't really care so much as what you
eat and how much i want you eating at
the same time every day whatever that is
it all depends on how you do the caloric
restriction so because it's not just
about the calories it's about the
hormones
when you look at the vegan diet
vegetarian diet it doesn't by its
default mean it's a healthy diet it just
means you're avoiding animal foods
so when you eat you're storing body fat
what you don't eat when insulin is going
down you're going to burn body fat
you're actually going to you can't burn
body fat if insulin is high so if you
feel bad in fasting doesn't bother me as
long as you get well you'll totally
forgive us
[Music]
one of the main benefits of fasting
prolongedly is affecting glucose insulin
mitochondria function that we introduce
the show on but it it drops empty
towards the floor and we know that
chronic mtor over expression is linked
with premature aging diseases
so i think the ability through drugs
through exercise and through fasting
protocols to manipulate this
critical energy sensor called mtor is
super fascinating so i think you know
right now in 2019 a lot of people are
microdosing psilocybin and lsd i
personally experiment with that fairly
often i think in two years people are
going to be microdosing rapamycin people
are going to be microdosing various mtor
inhibitors
to to like they're like called calorie
restriction memetics so we're kind of
manipulating the physiological effects
people are already [__] with
rapamyosin it's a very few you mentioned
the other one i'm blanking on it right
now like metformin metformin does it
take metformin i don't i take berberine
interesting so
the one thing like when the cameras stop
rolling yeah the one thing a lot of
people are like yeah i [__] with it is
is that a thousand percent i'm talking
about doctors yeah where i'm like
all right then like it's one of those it
is only my fear of the unknown where
it's like if something seems too good to
be true it probably is and i don't know
what kind because they've been giving it
to diabetics and cancer patients for a
long time a long time so uh i don't know
what kind of studies have come out based
on that but
metformin is probably one of the safest
drugs you could take um it it's actually
very poorly absorbed here's what's
really good so i've you know studied the
microbiome forever i'm very curious
about how these drugs work
like it's only 33 or something like that
is absorbed how is it working it's
affecting your microbiome it's affecting
the gut hormones and your bugs so very
safe the only thing you might need to
add more of would be b12 and folate
because it purportedly does affect
methylation and or absorption
but that's a very safe drug i i'm not i
wouldn't be ashamed to take say that i
take it i don't i take berberine so i do
that 500 milligrams of berberine
hydrochloride three same thing meant to
slow mtor
yeah well it it affects am i i don't
want to get complex into biochemistry
but you have kind of a yin yang you have
mtors growth ampk is break down okay
you know one's either good or bad they
just are uh berberine and metformin
increase ampk
ampk is a switch just like emptors of
switch they're different knobs so it's
breaking down what
crap inside ourselves okay so this is a
little bit like autophagy ampk and mtor
are the key cellular switches that
ultimately guide autophagy and govern
whether or not we're going to tear down
break down you know advert proteins
dysfunctional proteins aggregated
proteins dysfunctional organelles we
kind of talked about how our cells are
like little homes inside our appliances
those appliances become dysfunctional
and that's where autophagy
self-digest comes in and so you have a
bad furnace autophagy and will help to
clear that a bad furnace in your cell
would be a mitochondria golgi apparate
endoplasmic reticulum there's all these
different compartments it's even
speculated that the ability to break
down fat and glycogen stored glucose is
autophagy mediated even recovering from
exercise this is what's so cool so when
we feel sore after workout how do you
think our body recovers from that it's
via autophagy and breaking down those
damaged proteins so that we can rebuild
them so that they're stronger for our
next workout
so i like to throw that in there because
when people hear autophagy they think
fasting
but that's just one knob on the
sautophagi wheel exercise there's a ton
of data showing that exercise enhances
autophagy because you're causing your
body to dig deep and break down glycogen
for that workout
we recommend there's two types of
fasting there's short term intermittent
fasting which we recommend people do
every day that everybody fast every day
for between 12 and 16 hours depending on
what your target is and that means that
you don't eat at least three hours
before you go to sleep hopefully going
to sleep at a reasonable hour
and so that gives you 12 to 16 hours of
fasting and eight hour feeding window we
recommend that that in that eight hour
feeding window that the you know whole
natural food diet that you eat excludes
all the chemicals and the processed
foods and the other stuff and in doing
that you get the quantity and quality of
nutrients you need and you give yourself
a 16
hour period of fasting every day and
cumulatively that's thought to induce
changes and and stimulate factors that
are that promote healing it also helps
minimize overeating and so you know the
net effect of that intermittent fasting
which virtually everybody can do safely
on their own is something we recommend
and then periodically we recommend
people take a longer period of time to
do water only fasting in our clinic we
fast people from five to forty days
and so typically faster two three four
weeks of time that needs to be done in a
minute is that only for people that are
obese
no
no not at all in fact most of our
patients uh it's high blood pressure
diabetes autoimmune diseases lymphoma
and we have also healthy people that are
just coming in for a shorter period of
time like a week the reason we talk
about supervision in that regard is
number one not everybody's a good
candidate for fasting some people should
not be fasting
well if people have for example cranium
levels over 2.0 their kidney function is
inadequate putting them on a fast can
shut their kidneys down result in kidney
failure and death um if they have
cardiovascular why i've never heard that
but why would your kidney shot because
when you go on a fast you
massively mobilize a detoxification
response and the kidneys can only
process so much material and if you
overload the kidneys you end up with a
kidney failure situation and that's you
know you've heard recently there's been
people that have tried dry fasting and
dry fasting particularly puts a heavy
load in the kidney and there was a death
associated with one of its proponents
just because you know you have to have a
solute in order for the kidneys to
function you have to have a way of
getting the material that's mobilized
out of the system why is fasting
triggered detoxification
well if you think about it when you're
going on a fast there's nothing for the
body to do except mobilize its reserves
and in water fasting particularly in a
resting state those reserves are
predominantly fat
in fact we've done a study recently at
the true north health center where we've
used a dexa scanner with software that
allows us to do whole body composition
we've determined not only is mostly fat
mobilized during water only fasting but
specifically in preferentially visceral
fat
so a person might lose say for example
20 of their adipose tissue but they'll
lose 50 60 of their of their visceral
fat which is really exciting much faster
than for example being on a a low
carbohydrate diet in terms of the ratio
of visceral fat mobilization to
subcutaneous fat
and in that fat contains a lot of fat
soluble materials and it's where a lot
of toxins are stored
when those fats are mobilized you get a
increasing load pcbs dioxin pesticide
residues etc all these fat soluble
nutrients are rapidly mobilized
processed and eliminated but you need to
have the capacity to actually eliminate
materials and most of those matures are
eliminated in the urine that's the blood
being processed by the kidneys and if
you do a fat biopsy on any person you'll
find hundreds of different chemicals in
various concentrations and if you track
back how did those chemicals get in the
body where did they come from obviously
if people take drugs or they smoke and
they drink alcohol and they
eat foods from the environment that are
polluted that's a potential source but
about 90 percent according to some
researchers got there from one behavior
and that's eating animal foods
animals biologically concentrate the
toxins from their environment so a
calorie of animal food could have two to
a thousand times the concentration of a
given chemical compared to say a
plant-based food calorie and so the
consumption of large amounts of animal
food uh potentially expose people to
proportionally higher ratios of these
materials and it's also why people on
very high animal food diets often have a
much more difficult time adapting to the
fasting state initially because there's
just literally more to process and
eliminate but it does and so that's
particular i might mention true of
refined animal products just like
refined plant products have particular
problems so i think we need to be clear
that it's actually these highly
processed foods of any kind that seem to
be the biggest sources of concentration
of chemicals it's not necessarily the
brown rice that's the main problem it
might be the rice syrup or it's the
products that the highly concentrated
products that result in the largest
concentrations of
materials undesirable materials
when you fast though the body rapidly
mobilizes these materials if you fast
and exercise them
once you've depleted your glycogen
stores after say 24-48 hours the only
way the body would get the needed
glucose to maintain muscle activity or
excess brain activity would be through
gluconeogenesis you'd have to break down
proteins in order to get that so what
happens is if you fast and exercise you
actually lose more weight but more of
it's lean tissue
if you fast and rest you you mobilize
predominantly fat and specifically and
preferentially visceral fat so in
addition to making sure a person is a
good candidate for fasting with a
history exam and lab we also need to
make sure they rest during fasting now
there's modified fasting when you take a
certain amount of calories therefore you
have more glucose available you're able
to you know minimize gluconeogenesis
that's a different process
water only fasting though needs to be
done resting if you're going to maximize
detox preserve lean tissue
and maximize fat loss and that we've
been able to prove now you know we've
actually done this and we've done you
know before during after fasting
six-week follow-up so we've got the data
and so we can put a lot of the old wives
tales to rest that paper will be
published
later this year and and i think that'll
really make people aware of just why
this rest which is so controversial to
people trying to maximize weight loss is
important with fasting what are your
recommendations in terms of diet and
exercise for somebody who's ready
they've gotten sort of mentally prepped
they're ready to go down the actual sort
of mechanistic part of this journey yeah
that's a great question so
my goal is to help people become their
own self-experimentation right so i'm a
huge fan of the ketogenic diet right i
want the doctor osho talking about the
benefits of keto and i fell in love with
it to be honest with you but it might
not be for everybody and but what i tell
people is be open to experimenting
whether it's a plant-based diet or paleo
or keto or whatever it is be open to
some kind of experimentation with your
body because it's not a
one-size-fits-all approach i can't just
give you a diet of 2 000 calories that's
70 fat 25 protein 5 carbs and then boom
it'll magically work for you um just
realizing that you know what works for
me or you or someone else might not work
for you that's totally fine let's go
let's find something else that works for
you so um helping people realize that
it's a
it's a journey not a destination it's
not a race to the finish line right it's
not like how much weight can i lose in
the short amount of time with the least
amount of effort
you know just realize that this is a
lifestyle it's going to take time and
but being open to changing things
upgrading evolving as you are on your
journey i do uh intermittent fasting
every day i do i try to keep my average
pretty damn close to 20 hours a day
what are what's your take on
intermittent fasting fasting in general
useful not useful
i i love it i i advocate it in both of
my books i but you have to find what
works for your body because i feel like
sometimes people
i see this a lot they go
too aggressive with time-restricted
feeding or intermittent fasting and then
they
what's too aggressive well it's for
their body so let's just say
they want to try
like the omad like the one meal a day 22
to 2. you are
getting your calories in in a two hour
to one hour window so 22 to 2 or 23 to 1
fasting to eating window
you have to make sure you're getting
enough calories in that time that's a
big meal yeah so i've been experimenting
with it you've tried omad oh yeah and i
like it and i've just been doing this
i knew about the research i've written
about it before but i didn't do it for
myself until recently
um and i'm excited what's the research
saying because i want to live forever
okay is this going to help in that
endeavor i mean with
these longer periods of fasting you in
theory are up regulating these autophagy
pathways okay cellular recycling
gobbling a good sales goal where do you
think that kicks in 16 hour 18 hour 20
hours well i think depends on how
much inflammation is going on in the
person it depends on how insulin will
determine when autophagy kicks in yeah
because if the body you see people that
are resistant and look we can't gauge i
have no practical clinical way for me to
gauge autophagy
i wish i did but when a lab comes out i
will be running it but when you look at
people's biomarkers and the things we
can gauge you look at their blood sugar
you look at their insulin levels look at
their inflammation levels some people
can't get into this in ketosis very
easily they have to kind of
get these things in check and that takes
time right and then you could measure
your glucose you can measure your
insulin you can measure your ketones if
you wanted to have you ever worn a
continuous glucose i haven't it's
[__] interesting dude you have to do
it i need i know i need to i have
patience on it but i was gonna say like
that's a must
that it's it is if your diet is clean
it's a little bit
gimmicky maybe the wrong word but you
just get to see like oh wow like i ate
an impossible burger i thought i'm
really gonna like go ham on this whole
plant protein thing or plant-based diet
thing let me see how i do as i
upregulate
admittedly it was at a restaurant so
maybe they put so much panache in it
that it you know is what made it
ridiculous but dude i reacted like i ate
ice cream it spiked my glucose to like
170 which for me is crazy town yeah i
mean you could just see on the because
it's you know my continuous monitor is
pretty flat
this massive peak it was crazy i hope
you guys enjoyed this episode brought to
you by our sponsors at athletic greens
to receive a free one-year supply of
vitamin d and five free travel packs
with your first purchase visit
athleticgreens.com
impact theory enjoy the episode
be fasting three days a month seven days
every three months 14 days once a year
like i want to know that
and there's no amount of money that
would make it worth
you know not knowing the answer to that
question um wow that's a bold statement
well think about it i'm not to suggest
that like money doesn't matter and money
you can't do great things with money
like i want money just as much as the
next person
but never at the expense like i don't
want anything to get in the way of the
knowledge that can drive living longer
that to me is such a priority that i
would rather be
poor but know how to
you know live longer and have all the
money in the world and lose my health if
you look at this umbrella of
intermittent fasting within that are
different protocols alternate day
fasting the 5 2 16 8 where you're
fasting like you fast for 24 basically
20 hours a day
within that is this time-restricted
feeding bubble and they are having
subjects eat earlier in the day so they
started eating at eight and cutting off
at two and that was it and what they
showed is there was a dramatic increase
in autophagy just by doing that changes
in hormones changes in glucose insulin
but we always think well if a topic is
good more is better but if we think of
overweight people
their fat cells have higher levels of
autophagy occurring it's a compensatory
mechanism
because if you were to it sounds weird
but if you were to biopsy someone who's
morbidly obese and you look at their fat
tissue there's a lot of necrosis and
like literally tissues are dying there's
a lot of immune cells
so
if you didn't know anything about
autophagy and you looked at adipocytes
in obesity you would think autophagy is
bad because it's upregulated
and so i just want people to understand
and certain cancers utilize autophagy
upregulation to avert the immune system
to help it
so it's interesting so it's not this
clear
some
it's good or bad it's contextualized and
tissue specific
and sometimes more is not better
so that a lot of people are doing hey i
did a 24 hour fast one let's just roll
it out to 96 hours 72 hours
what are your goals why are you doing
this sometimes more is not better
and when isn't it better because so
if i knew for instance that um
fasting 100 would keep you cancer-free
but you have to do let's say a 14-day
fast i would do it i would do it every
year
so
when is when is too much too much
you know i think
when is too much is when it affects your
sleep when it affects your recovery your
muscle performance when you start seeing
negative side effects
when is it ideal
when you feel good you know i'm not sure
what the ideal situation is that really
true so when i think okay so now let's
make it real practical for me i'll just
be selfish for a minute so uh i hate
doing a five-day fast because my
productivity falls through the [__]
roof or floor um after 72 hours 72 hours
is very doable i can stay focused i
still have energy all that but the last
two days are gnarly and i i start
feeling sick and and i'm just slowing
down and i don't have my energy and i
find myself zoning out
so if it isn't advantageous i want to
stop doing it
but i know that my motives aren't pure
so i'm gonna need some compelling
evidence here
here's my thought is
autophagy
you know is influenced by circadian
rhythms by epigenetics and whatever
just like exercise why not make it more
consistent and shorter
so every week do a 24-hour fast does
everyone need to do that no but if
you're looking for longevity like you
are
and then every quarter do a little bit
of a longer one like three days or two
days or whatever right so there's a
little bit more consistency because if
you i did the math if you look at over
the course of a year you fast every
monday for 24 hours if you don't do any
other prolonged fast besides that you're
fasting for 16 of the entire caliber
year that gets you pretty close to that
20 calorie restriction that's well known
and it's a good proxy for longevity
enhancement at least in animals and
other humans without having to really
restrict yourself
anything else above that in my eyes is
just bonus so if you do a three-day fast
or a four-day fast
every six months that's just icing on
the cake and that can get you closer to
that 20 there's a physical component
there's a mental component and a
spiritual component right
physically we know that's great for
anti-aging longevity
anti-cancer
better digestion
cell regeneration in your body that's
the physical component yeah some people
do it for weight loss which i do not do
it for uh there's a mental component too
knowing that you can go
a day two three however long without
food and live and actually thrive just
realizing that you don't have to be
asleep to food
you can be in control of your body
is is um
it's amazing for your body and your mind
to realize that you're okay
without food you'll be okay you know
you're not gonna die and then a
spiritual component like there's a
reason
almost every major religion has some
type of fasting in it you know in the
mormon religion uh we grew up fasting uh
one 24 hours uh a month like one day a
month you fast for 24 hours and i hated
it as a kid so you know my perception of
what
fasting was was like uh this sucks but
there's a spiritual component like being
able to be more in tune with your body
and spirit
without having food to distract you
um is really powerful and i feel like it
can uh be spiritually uplifting you know
whether you're religious or not just
being more in tune with your body and in
your spirit as well like you you are a
soul i do really believe that
and i think fasting is a way to tap into
that and
so there's a physical mental and
spiritual component to fasting that i
just love and so for me i will i
intermittent fast almost every day and
then extended fasting i do kind of as a
cleanse maybe two to three times a year
and
all it ranges anywhere from three days
on the lower end to um you know i've
done a seven day fast before but i'll
admit for me already being really lean
that was kind of that was kind of tough
like day seven was really hard for me
and this was
during the winter in utah and my body
temperature drops so i get freezing cold
and then it was during christmas season
so there we were going to christmas
parties and there was food everywhere
i'm like okay next time i do this like i
gotta be like by myself
you know um but
for me and my sweet spot is
four days
to end water only so i'll do water and
just a little bit of salt right and
that's what i found works best for me
yeah it's really
i think it's super important for people
to
at least give fasting a try because so
my bias is living forever so the only
thing that's been shown across every
species to elongate lifespan is caloric
restriction and when you realize it
seems studies suggest that you get all
of the benefits of chronic caloric
restriction by doing um just even
intermittent fasting where it's a timed
window so you've taken the same number
of calories but you do it over a
condensed period of time yeah um that is
i think super important for people to
experiment with and look at and see what
kind of effect that is i think there's a
balance too because i think there's you
know quantity of life but there's also
quality of life it's not like you need
to fast and just eat at a calorie
deficit deficit for the rest of your
life like you know enjoy life too you
know have some wine you know have a beer
every once in a while and pizza like you
know but
you know when and and when it feels
right to you can i confess something
yeah go ahead i had ice cream this
weekend you did it no ice cream amazing
real ice cream realizing not like halo
top okay ice cream cold stone wow and my
wife and i just decided to like make it
we we've been working so much yeah that
just have a reconnect weekend and to do
something fun yeah and she was like you
know you game for this and it was rad
yeah and it was yeah it was a super good
reminder that while i think
you can obviously get yourself into
trouble if you're not in control of that
but for me i probably cheat on my diet
three times a year so it's like i don't
have an addictive personality first of
all so like that's not a real thing for
me um
but
dipping into it and like you said and
i've heard you talk wonderfully about
this like you said something like oh if
i'm at my mom's house and this christmas
and she makes you know some special
bread thing i'm gonna have the special
bread exactly
and i i love that talk about that like
how can
people um because i here's what makes me
sad
eating ice cream is awesome yeah being
alone by yourself in the corner of the
ice cream shop shoveling it down and not
making eye contact with people and
you're clearly not having fun like that
breaks my heart every time i see yeah
it's similar to kind of consuming
alcohol like are you by yourself
celebrating by or are you celebrating by
yourself are you kind of down on
yourself and you're eating your emotions
with that substance whether it's ice
cream or alcohol or drugs whatever it is
like what's your intention behind it for
me those types of moments with whether
it's alcohol or whether it's certain
types of foods are
meant to be you know a bonding thing
with with family or friends or a
positive experience
and yes i think in that situation if
your intention is just i'm eating i'm
stressed out so and no one's watching so
now's the time to do it that's where i
think that's uh
a behavior that needs to be worked on
right and i wish it was as simple as
saying well just don't do it right like
you wouldn't tell a drug addict like hey
stop doing drugs what's wrong with you
it's not that hard just put it down
it's similar for some people right where
they're you know eating their emotions
and they're so ashamed by it that they
you know have to do it by themselves and
it's sad and i feel like that's where
that self-worth comes in and the need
for
support system and accountability come
into play and
um it's not like a black and it's not
black and white there's so many gray
areas a lot of it has to do with trauma
or self-worth from a very young age and
now we're trying to tell people like
yeah you're beautiful you're worth it
and just change your behavior overnight
i wish it was that easy but just realize
that it's constant battle it's never
ending you're always going to fight it
for the rest of your life but
just realize that you're worth it to
keep fighting that's my message that's
my hope for people
even on these long fast two three four
five weeks and they're do they do fine
but they are resting and so resting in
some ways is a little bit harder but
it's more effective i say it's harder
because you'll detox more you'll feel
worse but we don't care how you feel we
care how well you get
so if you feel bad in fasting doesn't
bother me as long as you get well you'll
totally forgive us and so next time you
fast you want to make sure you rest
during that doesn't mean you can't do
some stretching you can't do meditation
there's things you can do but they're
more passive and then you look at how
your recovery is post-fasting you'll
find it's really quite fabulous because
not only you get rid of the inflammation
and the joint pain and some of the
chronic injuries but then you recover
quickly and we and we're able to
demonstrate that quantitatively now as
as lean tissue recovers fat continues to
go down after fasting so you're losing
fat you're losing fat you continue to
lose fat even though you're regaining
quote weight because glycogen water
fiber and muscle come back after fasting
fat does not what's interesting is you
have two pounds of glycogen so you know
you're going to get that two pound back
you've got fiber that has to go back in
the gut unless you're eating an all meat
diet then there is no fiber
and there's also hydration there's a
physiological dehydration with fasting
now that's
more
when you're exercising you dehydrate
more so it looks like you're losing more
weight but all you're doing is
dehydrating why are you dehydrating if
you're drinking water
it doesn't matter if you're drinking
water if it's you hold it in the cells
there's a physiological adaptation to
fasting where there's a natural
dehydration state it's probably part of
the conservation mechanism there's a lot
of weird things that happen very contra
intuitive during fasting like for
example you know we talked about
exercise increasing brain derived
neurotrophic factor that preserves the
brain and protects the nervous system it
also increases in fasting you think
about exercise you're vigorously active
fasting you're laying on your around and
not doing much they both are changing
these same things in the same way it's
it's really really
um
non-intuitive but when we look at the
science if we look at the data and then
we look at the clinical outcomes it's
really apparent and now we're tracking
people 30 35 years i've got people now
that are in their 80s that we started
off in their 50s and they all say the
same thing including my mother who at 92
had outlived all 50 of her lifelong
friends every one of her friends was
dead she was alone and she said alan you
need to warn your patients if they're
going to do this diet
make younger friends so i'm telling
people starting right now make younger
friends so when you're older and you're
still around you know they'll you'll
have people to interact with
people should try various diets and see
what works for them and i think a lot of
people get stuck in this regimented
thing where and it can backfire on them
too they're carnivore so then when
berries come in season when people might
watch this towards the end of summer
blueberries gonna be in full swing does
that mean you totally avoid blueberries
because there's i believe i'm not one of
these people that think plants are bad i
think blueberries the anthocyanidins and
the various and you know
antioxidants have a lot of benefit to
your microbiome and to your body in
general
but then when you start to identify that
you're a carnivore or a keto or you're
vegan
then you close yourself down a little
bit
so i think in your case you don't have
any major health issues that i'm aware
of you know that you've talked about so
i would just continue what you're doing
but maybe in the winter probably the
best time to go carnivore i'm going to
say [__] you and here's i don't have i
have one health issue and that is i'm
dying
so
the only real question i care about in
every health theory episode i do is how
do i live forever like if you're
steering by how you feel which is
essentially what i do
i just don't know what its impact is on
longevity
um if a carnivore diet like if somebody
could tell me no no a thousand percent
if you do a carnivore diet you're gonna
live to 150. i'd be all over the
carnivore diet all day every day i
wouldn't even think about it i'd never
touch another [__] blueberry in my
life like i would just eat it um but
it's it's that big [__] question mark
about longevity that winds me up well
let me pose this question to you how
could a diet be negatively affecting
your longevity if it makes you feel
better that makes your sleep better if
it improves your heart rate variability
if it makes you stronger if it makes you
recover better how could it slow down
your longevity i mean or affect
longevity in a negative way i don't know
maybe i'm not thinking about this
through properly but it doesn't make
sense to me
if your diet is con
is mostly consists of cinnamon toast
crunch and mountain dew like mine was
you know all these processed foods which
look i'll be honest with you they're
convenient they're affordable they're
super they're cheap compared to you know
a salad or whatever and they taste
really good they really do and there's
they are they can be very addictive for
some people
if you're eating real food most of the
time and you're moving your body every
single day biking or swimming or zumba
dancing ecstatic dance
whatever it is moving your body right
just getting out there moving and eating
real food you know no one
it's super easy to eat
20 cookies right like if you're like
stressed out and you're having these
baked goods in your house but no one's
gonna eat sit down eat 10 20 avocados
right
i mean i've never seen anyone do that
because they're stressed out and i think
if we could just get people to focus on
the process
of the habits that make a healthy
lifestyle rather than the results
then i think the results will take care
of themselves you have two daughters how
do you deal with food and them i mean
especially knowing how tasty processed
foods are
that's a great question i always ask
other parents when they come on my
podcast like what works for them because
it's different for each family for each
kid
because i see both ways of being overly
strict right and not letting them touch
a process
carbohydrate or any refined sugar
and then i know that the moment they're
with grandma or whether at the friend's
house on a play day or they're at school
where other kids are eating candy and
they can't
there's moments where i can't control
what they're going to eat but when
they're with me i try and control what
they eat and teach them
about why we eat certain foods like why
are we eating vegetables it's not a
punishment right i'm not making you do
it
it's there's a reason i'm you know we're
supposed to be eating vegetables and
here's why so from my girls are seven
and nine and they know
what uh broccoli is they know what
cauliflower is and you know we go
grocery shopping together i help i have
them help chop food and prepare the food
so they're in there in the kitchen
things like micronutrients i mean they
don't understand that so basically this
is what i do is i say hey on the inside
of us there's a lot of good guys there's
a lot of bad guys and when we eat
vegetables our good guys get stronger
and they can beat up the bad guys but
when we're eating junk food the bad guys
they get strong and they beat up the
good guys and that's when we feel sick
that's kind of what i tell them and it
seems to work um but you know i'll be
honest with you we do have treats every
once well but i'll get them like halo
top ice cream or something like that or
i'll make them a keto cookie and they
don't really know you know
but then they're with grandma this week
for example in in idaho and i know she's
going to give them
you know juice with high fructose corn
syrup and that kills me but i can't
micromanage every single person that
comes into my daughter's life so
don't beat yourself up just do the best
you can with what you have it's not
going to be perfect they're going to
you know have access to this food at
some point in time but if you can
control what they eat when you're with
them then that's all you can control
right and i i don't have the energy to
micromanage every single
food piece of food that goes into their
mouth but let's talk uh carnivore versus
vegetables so i
maybe i like vegetables a lot but i tend
to like the ones that are really um
carby
sweet potatoes are so delicious i would
give virtually everything to eat them
all day um
but
i
even though i like vegetables partly out
of laziness because i don't want to cook
them
i am almost not entirely because i'll
throw in rice every now and then um but
i'm
carnivore adjacent
i like that what is it
what
nutrients do you fear i will miss
if i were to eat organ meat and all that
but not
have vegetables i think if you are
eating organ meat
and doing it well with a variety of
nutrient-dense meats i don't think you'd
be meeting eat missing many nutrients
other than fiber
which
is
a major way that we help with gut
diversity
a robust variety of plant foods is
associated with a healthier microbiome
longer term and we have longer term
studies with these we don't have
longer-term studies with the carnivore
diet i would assume that if someone's
doing it properly there they probably at
a period of time would be
would seem more good than bad
because they're removing a lot of foods
and then it's going to be a net positive
for them if they're doing a properly
formed carnivore diet right but
is that going to be sustainable long
term for them
most people are are going to want more
variety than that you know a lot of us
have this ball and chain when it comes
to food right we're just
you know we eat at breakfast we eat
lunch and we work we take up so much of
our mental bandwidth that can be used
for productivity for relationships for
self-development but when i do
interviews when i interview other people
or when i'm being interviewed i like to
do it in a fasted state now
i didn't start doing that it took me a
while to get to the point where my
ketone levels get to a
point where i'm not feeling hypoglycemic
and the symptoms of like low blood sugar
affect me
but i don't really worry about is
because once you're fasted
for me personally
i don't start to get negative symptoms
in terms of sleep issues and maybe
constipation or whatever until day three
so i'm cool going to 36 hours and not
knowing am i going to have food or not
so it's just a way to clear the cobwebs
not have to worry about meal prep on
sunday but the reason why i do it is i
actually have a tumor biomarker that's
elevated called alpha fetal protein
interesting that's why you started doing
it well that's why i'm fasting pro more
on a more prolonged basis every time
people why why do you think that it and
then tell us the exact protocol yeah um
give people a little bit of the
background on the potential anti-cancer
properties what you've read i'm super
interested in this so you can go as
crazy as you want well you know there's
a lot of research people talk about
fasting first of all lowering glucose
and insulin and so obviously there's
many different cancer subtypes and
cancer cells metastasize and they they
mutate and and so forth but a lot of
research shows that cancer cells can
utilize glucose and insulin to thrive so
getting rid of those growth insulin i've
not heard that so the cancer cell can
actually use insulin as what a growth
factor is a growth factor to kind of
pivot uh their metabolism to a more
glycolytic so they're burning sugar
instead of fats and we'll get into
autophagy in a minute but insulin is
involved in kind of amplifying mtor
mechanistic target of rapamycin i know
you had peter atiya on and he talked at
length about this but this is really the
gas pedal for cellular growth
and so it's and i like to just pause
right here and let people know it's it i
describe mtor
like a light switch in your home right
it's not good or bad it's the context
that matters your light switch is great
when you want to find something in the
dark but it can be bad if you're
sleeping and someone turns it on so
that's where you know every time we eat
even if it's a vegan meal or a
animal-based meal we're going to
stimulate mtor so just wanted to throw
that out there it's not good or bad it
just is in its context but getting back
to your question about insulin that
could be the purported mechanism through
which insulin may affect cancer growth
is
through mtor activation which just kind
of fuels pro-growth pathways
yeah so getting back to it glucose
inhibition or lowering glucose down
lowering insulin enhancing mitochondrial
function so a lot of people i'm sure
you've talked about this you know if we
envision our home being a cell
our home has different appliances right
we have the refrigerator the stove top
the furnace uh inside each one of our
cells we have different appliances
they're called organelles so they're
little
cells within cells really and our
mitochondria play a key role in helping
us burn fat for fuel helping us think
clearly helping us move our muscles
and it seems that mitochondrial
dysfunction is uh you know an upstream
event leading to
various diseases from mild cognitive
impairment to blood sugar issues
and
low energy fatigue things like that but
certainly cancer as well so we got the
mitochondrial function and then for me
enhancing autophagy
so as i said
i do lab work i've been doing lab work
like you know comprehensive metabolic
panels twice a year and i started to
have this gi pain and i could not figure
out where it was coming from and it was
just like persistent so after three
months this was back in 2015.
i started to do some research on the
internet and i'm like you know maybe i
could have cancer maybe i could have
something
and i started to look and since it was
in this region i was looking for
gastrointestinal biomarkers so i
measured those
and there was this one test called alpha
fetal protein which is high in people
that have hepatitis or hepatocellular
carcinoma which is a
metastasis of the liver
so i ran it and the normal range is zero
to eight and mine was 80. whoa so
anytime you have a weird biomarker just
retest because it could just be part of
the lab so i retested it and it was 79
and then i was freaking out like dude
because i have a little girl at home so
i'm i was nervous right
you're nervous because that's indicative
of having this liver cancer exactly okay
so because i had this biomarker i
started to kind of believe that i might
have cancer and then i started like on
one hand it was great because i was more
present with my daughter enjoying the
moment putting down the phone at night
things like that but on the other side i
was like i can't have this mindset that
i have something i
and this is common in western medicine
you have autoimmunities you have
hashimoto's so people start saying i
have ms i have this and i i think we
need to realize that
certainly our body can have
perturbations but it doesn't mean you're
always going to manifest symptoms of
that if you you can the body and the
mind and the diet and lifestyle are so
powerful
one of the things that i found
fascinating about your own story is that
you start as uh were you full vegan or
were you just vegetarian i was a vegan
for 10 years okay so
you migrate away from that why did you
migrate away from that
so i think
there's a good way to do an optimal way
to go to the vegan diet and there's many
vegan keto options in ketotarian so if
people are for religious reasons or
ethical reasons or personal preference
reasons
i wanted to teach them to go entirely
plant-based in a way that i believe is
sustainable not only for the environment
but for
their physiology
their environment their bodily
environment so
we all have different gene snips i have
a double gene snip
of the mthfr gene which is the gene that
makes the enzyme that converts folic
acid into folate
which we need is a methyl donor it
basically does a lot of cool things for
our body it's a carbon hydrogen group
that
brings down inflammation it helps our
hormones working well our brain working
well it builds proteins in our bodies my
body does that pretty dang slowly like
up to 70 percent slower
and folate uh especially in abundant
amounts and b12 aren't as high in
in b vitamins uh when you're doing
entirely plant-based so i
adjusted my diet where i'm still
predominantly plant-based but i'm
bringing in things like egg yolks into
the vegetarian land
and then the wild caught fish and as far
as the pescetarian section of my diet
to provide my body more ample
bioavailable sources of these nutrients
and omega fats are another one of them
not just the b vitamins but the
conversion
is lousy in my body of these like flax
seeds and chia seeds my body doesn't
convert them to sort of the long chain
omegas as well as somebody else so we
have to find out what works for a body
then there's some people that do great
with vegan diets i mean you know rich
role right the guy does amazing on this
diet and his wife julie they do fine
but
i talk to patients for a living and i
most of my patients are very well read
they've done all their research
they're eating cleaner than most
americans they're eating vegan diets
they're eating vegetarian diets they're
doing all these things but their health
is struggling how can we optimize it
without abandoning the foundation of
maybe their ethics or principles right
so one thing in the book that you cover
is what oftentimes vegetarians and
vegans do wrong what is that where do
they
what whole is in their diet that you
help fix
i think a lot of them
overdo it on the carbs you know they're
carbitarians by definition
and
when you look at the vegan diet
vegetarian diet
it doesn't by it default meaning it's a
healthy diet just means you're avoiding
animal foods
so you have to
have it properly formed you have to
really lean into it it's so easy because
it's convenient to get all these
convenient vegetarian foods just like
any other way of eating so you want to
make sure you're again focusing on whole
foods real foods look at your macros
just get a snapshot of where you're at
from a macronutrient which is proteins
fats and carbs some people have a taller
they can handle more carbs some people
can't like i have many patients that if
they ate what rich role ate their blood
sugar would be through the roof
but some people can do it
so we have to find your what works for
your body and what doesn't
so they could that doesn't mean that
they shouldn't be plant-based maybe they
just need to shift what plant-based
foods are focusing on that's all
the other thing with fasting while we're
talking about risks is the re-feeding
period
if you have a long period of fasting and
you re-feed inappropriately you can get
a condition called re-feeding syndrome
which can be fatal it's a very serious
problem where electrolyte balances and
all kinds of stuff can occur we've never
seen that because we have a very
specific refeeding protocol that's
followed and we refeed for a period of
no less than half the length of the fast
in a controlled setting so it is it is
important you can also get a condition
called post-fasting edema when you get
off all the greasy salty processed crap
that people are living on and you do a
fast all that gets flushed out of the
body if you then expose a person to very
high concentrations of sodium like in
commercial soups or something like that
the body will suck that material and
fluid up to protect itself from it and
that can result in post-fasting edema if
you do it slowly you can get back to
whatever your normal diet was without
that problem but it has to happen over a
period of time so there's a re-feeding
period that's important particularly in
this long-term fasting you know in the
three-day the five-day fast for most
people that's not going to result in you
know as much of it of an issue they may
get a belly ache if they eat eat too
much food but they're not going to get
the very serious consequences as you can
see in very long-term fasting now the
other concern here is of course
medications some medications you don't
want to rapidly discontinue
anticoagulant medications steroid
medications any psychotic medications
the rapid withdrawal of those
medications can induce a very serious or
life-threatening response
some medications
you want to get off as soon as possible
but you don't want to be taking those
medications during fasting so
medications that might not do that much
damage feeding can be very serious
fasting even non-steroidally
anti-inflammatories and common
over-the-counter medications in the
fasting state strongly contraindicated
result in all kinds of downstream
consequences
supplementation
is included lots of complications in the
fasting state whereas you wouldn't
necessarily see any problem in the
feeding state that's one of the reasons
we talk about making sure before a
person undertakes a long-term fast they
have appropriate history exam and lab
remember 99 of patients have no
complications uh with fasting but one
percent can have very serious
complications important that percentage
be identified monitored and so you don't
end up with bad outcomes because that's
what gives fasting a bad name is people
doing it inappropriately they continue
to work they get dehydrated which is one
of the main issues with fasting is
maintaining adequate hydration and
drinking water itself won't assure that
in fact drinking too much water can
flush your electrolytes out and result
in
um
water intoxication so if we don't solve
the problem drinking water how do we
solve the problem
right we solve it by resting maintaining
appropriate hydration and allow the
natural recycling mechanisms in the body
to maintain nutritional status and
monitoring people so that we don't get
into a depleted state that's why we're
monitoring electrolytes that's why we do
twice daily examinations on patients so
it is a safe and natural adaptation
remember fasting is a biological
adaptation you notice everybody every
human can fast we have to be able to
fast every human that couldn't fast died
because every time spring came late
there's no way to sustain this bulbous
neural net our massively oversized brain
two and a half times the vas of say a
chimp chimps don't fast you don't feed a
chip in a week or so they're dead they
that's why you'll never see chimps
wandering away from the tropics they
live with a constant year-round supply
of food because their brain doesn't
change to burning
ketones your brain is a bi-fuel brain it
changes completely the normal
fuel is glucose and that's your main
burner of glucose is your brain
that's the biggest thing and when the
brain goes into fasting state it changes
to burning ketone bodies particularly
beta hydroxybutyric acid and it becomes
preferentially burning it just brings a
tiny little bit of glucose and that's
the little bit of gluconeogenesis that
continues during fasting unless you're
active
then of course your muscles burn glucose
and now you really start breaking muscle
down
so um the brain being a bi-fuel brain
had to be that way because otherwise
humans when spring came late because we
burned so much glucose in our brain we
wouldn't have been able to make it and
this is the mechanism by which fasting
mimicking diets and keto diets play
because if you go on a very high fat
diet or a high fat high protein diet
which some people do and you don't eat
carbohydrates this fasting mechanism
kicks in so your brain changes over to
burning ketones you go into ketosis and
it has a hunger blunting effect
when you're in a ketotic state you don't
feel hunger and as a consequence that
helps people that are trying to do
short-term weight loss the problem is
what's good for short-term weight loss
isn't necessarily the same thing that's
best for long-term health stability so
in our clinic we're not a weight loss
clinic we're not looking to maximize
gross weight on the scale over a short
period of time we're interested in fat
loss and improving health so we're
looking at what does it take not only to
live a long life everybody wants to live
their full potential but more
importantly how do you avoid debility
how do you avoid spending the last 79.6
years into ability 16 years in poor
health what the average person is doing
how do you avoid finding yourself unable
to talk or move lying in some nursing
home bed waiting for people to change
your diaper for the last years or
decades of your life how do you increase
healthy life expectancy not just life
expectancy the years you live fully
functional how do you ensure a good
death that means you live your life to
your full potential one day you go to
sleep you don't wake up because you
reached your genetic potential and not
become debilitated uh individual for
years and decades where we spend most of
our money and effectively trying to
manage illnesses that were caused by
poor diet lifestyle choices
that's what we're using fasting to do is
try to help healthy life expectancy and
then a whole plant food sos free diet to
sustain it this distinction between
chronic caloric restriction
and fasting
that i find really interesting and let
us for the sake of this discussion
assume that we have
a person who is willing to endure an
unlimited amount of suffering um and you
even you've talked a lot about the book
unbroken that you read about world war
ii
people in japanese concentration camps
and they were literally being starved
and obviously all of them got lean so
what i want to understand is okay
fasting seems to have all these
tremendous benefits chronic caloric
restriction has some but also has like
this really damaging psychological
component if there was no damaging
psychological component
would they be equal or is there still
some difference
it all depends on how you do the caloric
restriction so because it's not just
about the calories it's about the
hormones right so you have to sort of
take it not to sort of this two
compartment problem you have to take it
to like a three compartment problem
right there's what's coming in there's
what's stored and there's what's being
used okay so most people only think of
sort of the two compartments and then
the storage is sort of left over that's
not the way the body works
if insulin is high your body is going to
store calories remember insulin is a
nutrient sensor it tells your body that
hey energy is coming in you're eating
you need to store some of this
right so you eat breakfast lunch dinner
did you get somebody on a low calorie
diet like if you were on
700 calories a day but i gave you
insulin can i make you fat yeah
absolutely whoa
because think about it this way if you
have insulin your body and so if you
think about it physiologically
if you have insulin your body goes into
a storage mode because it's a hormone
insulin is a hormone it tells your body
food is coming in and even if you don't
give food if you just give insulin
you're going to switch your body into
this mode where it thinks that food is
coming in so it's going to store energy
so imagine that for example you are a
coal
you know a coal uh plant right the power
plant you get 2 000
tons of coal coming in and you burn 2
000 tons of coal that's fine but you
have a storage compartment too so if
you're you know if you do a thought
experiment say you say you have 2 000
tons of coal coming in
you divert the whole thing over to
uh or a thousand tons of coal into
storage well you only have a thousand
left so you're gonna feel tired and cold
and hungry
and you're gonna get fat at the same
time right that's what's gonna happen
but it's because of the way that you've
diverted off the energy so think about
it from a human body standpoint
suppose you have two thousand calories
coming in two thousand calories going
out
now you artificially inject insulin
well you shuttle a thousand calories
immediately into body fat and you have a
thousand calories left
to burn well what's going to happen your
your body heat generation is going to go
down your heart rate is going to slow
you're going to feel tired you're going
to feel hungry because you want to get
more energy right that's the signal for
you to get more energy so that you can
get more you can burn more
guess what that's exactly what happens
when you go on a chronic calorie
restricted diet
and the the point is that if you do it
correctly and you you correct that
insulin part of things
so that none of it's going into storage
and you can't do that with chronic
calorie restriction you certainly can
you have to know that you have to do it
properly like cutting out
processed foods cutting out refined
carbohydrates that kind of thing but it
all depends on that sort of that sort of
toggle in the middle that says how much
goes here how much grease here insulin
what it does is it tells your body to
store fat but it also turns off fat
burning remember fat is purely a store
of energy it's a store of calories
so you're immediately shuttling all your
energy into storage and you have nothing
left
so say you take 700 calories but you're
pumping people full of insulin
so
that energy is going to go into
into
storage and 700 is probably the lower
limit of what you could really do but
your body would then try to subsist on
say five six hundred calories of energy
you'd get really hungry because you're
you've got no energy coming in you'd
probably wouldn't be able to last very
long but you could still gain weight
there's a great experiment a few years
ago
where they actually took the type 2
diabetics and they gave them a lot of
insulin so they went from zero
units a day to a hundred units a day
over a span of six months which is a lot
and they dropped the number of calories
that they ate by 300 okay so they're
taking insulin but they're eating less
700 300 calories a day less
so over the span of six months on
average that group gained 20 pounds
20 pounds
by eating 300 calories a day
less
why because so let's take an example
you're eating 2000 calories you go down
to 1700
but the insulin is shuttling 700 of that
immediately off to storage so you're
gaining body fat
now your body can only burn 1000
calories a day so you feel like crap you
feel tired you feel hungry and you're
still gaining weight and guess what if
you do it wrong which is constantly
snacking and eating cutting out all the
dietary fat and eating all
refined carbohydrates which remember is
almost precisely what we told people to
do in the 80s and 90s oh i remember it
well yeah actually
i had a tub of licorice because it was
fat-free and i would just eat it and eat
it i'm like it's fat-free
what's happening why am i getting fat
yeah that was a very confusing time
it makes perfect sense from like because
but you have to think of that additional
step that is what is the body actually
doing it's this sort of flip the switch
so when you eat you're storing body fat
when you don't eat when insulin is going
down you're going to burn body fat
you're actually going to you can't burn
body fat if insulin is high
i'm going to put you to the test for a
second so
hiding behind the screen door number one
is somebody i'm not going to tell you
anything about them i'm not going to
tell you if they're a man or woman
overweight ripped whatever
but you have to tell them how to eat
for
longevity
and feeling good
how should they eat
i would say
sally or joe look i don't know what your
health issues are i don't know what
you're experiencing
but we're going to get you off anything
that comes in a box bag or a can no
processed food no processed food i want
you to go to a farmer that's within a
50-mile radius of you
ask them what you can buy that's in
season
and and buy the animal products that you
feel comfortable consuming i don't
really care so much as what you eat and
how much i want you eating at the same
time every day whatever that is so
influencing the circadian rhythm
so there's a lot of new research studies
where they're controlling how many
calories people are eating the same
amount of calories but if they force it
into a confined window
it changes this mtor expression and not
just a defined window but the same
defined window every day you hit on the
head exactly so if you're if you're
gonna intermittent fast great then eat
from say you know noon to six or two to
eight it doesn't matter but just try to
be consistent just like we should try to
go to bed at the same time and wake up
at the same time you know we hear a lot
about toxic blue light
well when we eat and food in general
affects our circadian biology
we have molecular clocks in our gut and
our muscle and our brain and our
pancreas everywhere
food entrains that clock too fortunately
now there's
a higher and higher percentage of
organically grown fruits and vegetables
available in fact do you know who the
largest seller of organic produce in the
country is now no it's costco foods whoa
okay costco foods is the largest
producer or seller of organic products
you know who number two is no it's
walmart ah i should have guessed so
what's happened now is they've said oh i
don't think these companies sat down and
said well we really want to help the
health of our clients they said oh
people will pay a premium for
food that doesn't use glyphosate or
doesn't use chemicals well why don't we
sell them that food and now it's become
a dominant source of their produce sales
because people spoke with their dollars
and they said we would prefer to have
our vegetable material grown without
this and they're doing the same thing
with meat you know they're trying to buy
free-range meat that doesn't have all
the
antibiotics and the chemicals because
they know that animals biologically
accumulate and concentrate these
materials and i don't always think it's
an and or too even if you're going to
for example include animal foods in your
diet if you eat a dominant amount of
vegetable materials in addition to that
your likelihood that your negative
consequences from the animal food will
be minimized and then the health
benefits of being a healthy diet are
going to be maximized i think it's a
question of proportion and quantity
that's the major issue
i don't think that there's any evidence
that the hundred percent vegan
necessarily has any advantage over the
person that's mostly vegan and uses a
small amount of other products in their
diet i don't know that we can
demonstrate that difference not from a
health standpoint there's this chronic
inflammation in the bowel and what you
get is a super high risk of cancer down
the down the line so uh both
inflammation and
hyperinsulinemia and obesity all of them
are risk factors and and this is the
important thing is that
there's a lot of different things that
can contribute to the risk of cancer
it's not just that if one is right then
the other is wrong i mean both are
correct so if you eat
foods that are highly inflammatory and a
lot of people feel that for example
omega-6 seed oils perhaps are in in
these big doses that we take perhaps
those are highly inflammatory that
even if it doesn't cause obesity could
be a factor because we know inflammation
chronic inflammation can certainly do
that so both can be very important jason
thank you so much for joining me today i
really really enjoyed our time together
and i really enjoyed researching you as
well i'm so super grateful and speaking
of things you'll be grateful for if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential